=== Explaining a Cascalog Query

===== Problem

Your Cascalog job runs very slowly and you aren't sure why.

===== Solution

Use the explain function to print out a DOT file of your query.
[source,clojure]
----
(ns cookbook.cascalog-explain
  (:require [cascalog.api :refer [explain]]
            [yourapp.queries :refer [slow-query]]))

(explain "slow-query.dot" slow-query)
----

View the dotfile. There are many ways to do that. One is to use +dot+,
one of the graphviz tools, to convert a dotfile to a png or gif.

[source,console]
----
$ dot -Tpng -oslow-query.png slow-query.dot
----

Now open slow-query.png in your web browser to see a diagram of your
query.

===== Discussion

Cascalog workflows compile into Cascading workflows. Cascading is a
Java library that wraps Hadoop, providing a flow-based plumbing
abstraction. The query graph in the dot file will have different
Cascading elements as nodes.

The +explain+ function here is analagous to the +EXPLAIN+ command in
many SQL implementations. +explain+ causes Cascalog to print out the
query plan. Just like the output from a SQL +EXPLAIN+, you might have
to work to understand exactly what you are seeing.

The biggest thing to look for is that the basic flow of the query is
what you expected. Make sure that you aren't rerunning some parts of
your query. Cascalog makes it easy to reuse queries, but often you
want to run the query, save the results, then reference the saved
results from other queries instead of running it once for every time
its output is used.

You can also work to match up the phases from your query plan to a job
as it is running. This is tricky, because the phases won't correspond
exactly to your output map. However, when you succeed, you'll be able
be able to track down the slow phases.

In general, to keep your Cascalog queries fast, make sure you are
using all of the nodes in your cluster. That means keeping the work in
small, evenly sized units. If one map input takes 1000 times as long
to run as the other 40 inputs, your whole job will wait on the one
mapper to finish. Working to split the long map job into 1,000 smaller
jobs would make the job run much more quickly, since it could be
distributed across the entire cluster instead of running on a single
node. It is particularly easy to accidentally have nearly the entire
job end up in one reducer. This is easy to see happening in the Hadoop
job tracker when nearly all the reducers are done and the job is
waiting on one or two reducers to finish. To fix this, do as much
reduce work as possible during the map phase using aggregators, and
then make sure that the remaining reduce work isn't all piling up into
a small number of reducers.

===== See Also

* <<sec_aggregating_large_files>>
